---
Learner personas:
  - "code contributor"
  - "code-adjacent contributor"
  - "manager/stakeholder"
Pre-requisites:
  - "Module 1: Introduction to Open Source"
---

# Chapter 01: Why and how to contribute to Open Source

## Table of Contents 🗂️

- [Chapter 01: Why and how to contribute to Open Source](#chapter-01-why-and-how-to-contribute-to-open-source)
  - [Table of Contents 🗂️](#table-of-contents-️)
  - [Learning Objectives 🧠](#learning-objectives-)
  - [Why contribute to OSS? 🌱](#why-contribute-to-oss-)
    - [Individual volunteer contributors](#individual-volunteer-contributors)
      - [Extrinsic motivation](#extrinsic-motivation)
      - [Intrinsic motivations](#intrinsic-motivations)
    - [Organizational funded contributors](#organizational-funded-contributors)
    - [🙋 Learner question: Do you know why CZI contributes to napari?](#-learner-question-do-you-know-why-czi-contributes-to-napari)
  - [Volunteer and organizational contributions 🤝](#volunteer-and-organizational-contributions-)
  - [Resources 📚](#resources-)

## Learning Objectives 🧠

<!-- TODO: Populate as various sections & their content is added. -->

- Understand why individuals and organizations contribute to open source.

## Why contribute to OSS? 🌱

The open source contributors' community is massive, and everyone has their personal reasons and motivations for being a part of this community. Reflecting on your motivations and understanding fellow contributors' motivations will help you collaborate effectively. In the following sections, we'll briefly explore common motivations for individuals and organizations to contribute to open source.

### Individual volunteer contributors

Individuals who volunteer their time to contribute, with no direct monetary compensation for their contributions, form the backbone of the open source community. Numerous open source tools critical to our digital infrastructure are entirely sustained by volunteer contributors.

We can understand their motivation to work on OSS by looking at extrinsic and intrinsic factors, all equally valid, that drive them.

#### Extrinsic motivation

- **Career development**: If you work on proprietary software in your day job, you can contribute to OSS to add a public record of your skills or build your portfolio. The communities around OSS projects also connect people across domains and organizations, which can help you grow your professional network.

- **Up-skilling**: You can strategically choose OSS projects and tasks that help you develop specific skills. You can learn from fellow contributors who are experts in your area-of-interest, while also making valuable improvements to the project.

- **Recognition**: Creating and/or maintaining popular open source projects makes you one of the experts in that area. There are many ways in which OSS domain-expert-contributors gain recognition and visibility, from gaining social media following, to getting invited to conferences & podcasts, and more. This popularity and influence can often be a powerful motivator to continue contributing to and maintaining the project.

#### Intrinsic motivations

- **Community**: Communities are the life force of open source projects. Brett Canon, a Python Steering Council member and core Python developer once said: "I came for the language, but I stay for the community", a statement that resonates with a lot of contributors in the Python open source community. You may contribute to OSS projects or volunteer your time and expertise to community initiatives because you like your community of collaborators.

- **Hobby and passion**: Many people find joy, satisfaction, and excitement by working on OSS projects in their free time. Perhaps it's a project they use regularly, they created from scratch, or it's work they find personally rewarding.

- **Responsibility**: Sole or long-term maintainers or project creators feel a sense of responsibility toward their open source project and its users, and continue to contribute and maintain it.

- **Ideology**: Open source software started as an ideological movement. Using and contributing to open source is an identity and way of life for many people, and that's at the core of their contributions.

### Organizational funded contributors

Corporate or non-profit organizations sponsor teams of people to contribute to open source projects or provide funds directly to the projects' sustainers, or both.
Their incentives can be greatly varied, ranging from software commercialization to public visibility to more philanthropic reasons.

- **Stability**: Companies that have internal tools that rely on community OSS projects contribute to these upstream OSS projects to ensure their stability, long-term existence, and maintenance.

- **Adoption and Sustainability**: Organizations open source their internal projects to grow their adoption and build a community of users and contributors around them. Suppose the project is hosted publicly, free to use, and open to contributions. In that case, it adds trust in the project and its long-term availability, and more people are willing to use it, as well as opt-in for commercial services developed around the open source project, if any. Moreover, if the company intends to reduce direct investment in the project, the open source community can share maintenance efforts to keep the project active.

- **Efficiency**: It's more efficient to solve certain foundational problems in the open by collaborating with organizations and individuals in the broader tech community. For instance, open "standards" have wider adoption, allowing tools built with said standards to reach more people. Companies can then focus on more innovative work that builds on these foundations.

- **Software quality and security**: Open source software tools, especially community-driven projects, have high standards for software development, documentation, and security, compared to internal or proprietary software. People with different expertise can contribute and engage with OSS projects, improving them organically over time. This is a strong incentive for companies to build tools in the open. Such an open development also increases the chances of catching vulnerabilities quickly by having a broader pool of end users and use cases.

- **Talent retention**: Companies enable employees to contribute to OSS to keep them engaged and happy at their job, because the individuals may have strong personal motivation to contribute.

- **Reputation**: Contributing to open source projects can benefit public relations (PR). It can be messaged as a part of their philanthropic initiatives or corporate social responsibility. It shines a positive light and increases user trust in the company.

### 🙋 Learner question: Do you know why CZI contributes to napari?

We give you a starting point below, but this is something you need to answer with your team.

Napari is a powerful, open source, imaging tool for scientific research. It fits CZI's mission to solve the global challenge of eradicating disease by investing in science and technology. You can innovate faster and reach more people with an open-source-friendly philosophy.

## Volunteer and organizational contributions 🤝

In addition to different motivations, volunteers and organizational contributors have different types and scales of impact on the open source project. Therefore, they need to have different priorities and focus-areas for the overall project health.

Volunteer contributors have a community-first perspective. They keep the project neutral and ensure that enhancements benefit everyone in the community beyond any single organization. Volunteers keep the project's lights on with regular maintenance and community activities. A diverse group of volunteers are essential to the project's sustainability. However, volunteers have limited time and capacity to contribute, especially to large-scope tasks that could benefit from their expert feedback and guidance.

Organizational contributions are equally important to the project's sustainability. Dedicated financial support allows the project to move beyond day-to-day maintenance and work on high-impact improvements. Organizational support can look like:

- Organizations' employees spending some work-hours to contribute to OSS,
- Providing direct monetary or in-kind sponsorship to the project,
- Funding a well-scoped long-term initiative in the project,
- Hiring volunteer contributors to continue working on the project,
- and more.

Organizations often have some [corporate incentives](#organizational-funded-contributors) for contributing. Individuals representing organization may also have different working styles. These can lead to some friction while working with the broader community.

It's important for everyone to work collaboratively to keep the project stable, and find alignment between organizational needs and community needs. For example, organizations can share maintenance tasks to enable volunteers to provide feedback on some work that's critical to the organization. We'll cover some concrete best practices in the next chapter.

## Resources 📚
